# Assignment K2
Edwin Zhang and Bill Cui

## Path to executable

`cs452-a1/build/kernel`

## Access, make, operate
`git clone ist-git@git.uwaterloo.ca:b22cui/cs452-a1.git`

`cd cs452-a1`

`git checkout k2`

`chmod a+x compile_target.sh`

`./compile_target.sh`

`cd ./build`

Then, move the `kernel` onto the track computer

`cp kernel /u/cs452/tftp/ARM/e42zhang`

`chmod o+r /u/cs452/tftp/ARM/e42zhang/kernel`

To run the program, issue the following:

1. `load -h 10.15.167.5 ARM/e42zhang/kernel`

2. `go`

To clean the build file:

`cd ./build`

`make clean`

## Operating Instructions

To run the program, issue the following:

1. `load -h 10.15.167.5 ARM/e42zhang/kernel`

2. `go`

## Program Description


### (NEW) Send Receive Reply

Send receive reply is implemented through the following syscalls: 

`int Send(int tid, const char *msg, int msglen, char *reply, int rplen);`,

`int Receive(int *tid, char *msg, int msglen);`,

`int Reply(int tid, const char *reply, int rplen);`

Lets say we have two tasks. $A$ and $B$. We hope to illustrate the algorithm with the following scenarios:

Scenario 1

$A$ performs `Send` to $B$. Since $B$ has not yet executed `Receive`, $A$ is not added back into the ready queue as it is now blocked. Each TCB contains a queue called `want_send` implemented as a linked list. When $A$ wants to `Send` to $B$ before $B$ is able to execute `Receive`, $A$ is added to $B$'s `want_send` queue. Now later on when $B$ executes `Receive`, it first sees if any other TCBs wish to send to it. If there is then we call `handle_send`.

Scenario 2

$B$ first calls `Receive`. It  sees if any other TCBs wish to send to it. Since there are none yet, $B$ is taken off the ready queue with state == `RECEIVE`. $B$ can then only be placed back into the ready queue when a TCB wants to send to it. When $A$ calls `Send`, it will find $B$ and see it is in the `RECEIVE` state. We will then call `handle_send`.

Lets continue to assume that $A$ is sending to $B$, `handle_send` performs the following:

1. $A$ is set to be REPLY. It is still blocked, but is now awaiting a reply.
2. $B$ is placed back onto the ready queue with status READY
3. The contents in $A$'s `send_args` is then copied to $B$'s `receive_args` through `msg_copy`.

Now $A$ is still blocked but $B$ is free to run. Later on when another task executes `Reply` to $A$, `msg_copy` is executed to copy that task's message back to $A$ and then both tasks get placed back onto the ready queue.


### (NEW) Nameserver

The nameserver provides functionality such as `int RegisterAs(const char *name);` and `int WhoIs(const char *name);`

These are really just wrappers around `Send`, `Receive`, and `Reply`. 

Nameserver's overarching datastructure is a hashtable. Since there are no syscalls for "deregistering" a TCB from a name, the hashtable only has get and insert operations. The hashtable uses a singular modulo hash function that is unit tested in `/tests/unit/hashtable.c`.

When a task wishes to register itself to a name, it calls `RegisterAs`. The nameserver, upon `Receive` is able to get the TCB_tid of the task through the `closure_mechanism`. In other words the task's id is obtained as a part of `send_params` instead of manually requiring the TCB to pass its id for `RegisterAs`. Now that the nameserver knows the taskid of the TCB as well as the name it wishes to register as (passed as a `nameserver_request` struct). It can perform the hashtable insert. When a different task wishes to register as the same name, the previous task's entry would be overwritten.


When a task performs `WhoIs`, the nameserver performs a hash table lookup and will then `Reply` the tid as part of the `nameserver_response` struct. Before passing to the kernel the struct is serialized into a char array and is deserialized on the other end back into a struct.

The `nameserver_response` and `nameserver_request` structs contains a `type` and `body`. The `type` allows for an easy and readable way to differentiate between request and response types. Kind of like the `GET`, `POST`,... pattern in web servers. The body is an unstructured array that is given structure through context given by the `type`. The receive and response end can parse the `body` according to the `type`. For instance if the request type is `REQUEST_REGISTER_AS`, then the nameserver knows that there is no information in the body of the response, and so it will return a response of type `RESPONSE_GOOD` with no body. If the request type was `REQUEST_WHO_IS` instead, then the nameserver knows to look in the body to obtain the name. The task who initiated this request would also know to look in the body to obtain the returned task_id.


### (NEW) RPS

The `RPSserver` follows a similar pattern as the nameserver. There are many different response and request types to organize the code. 

There is a pointer `free_game` that always points to the next game that is free to be used.

Suppose there are two tasks, $A$ and $B$. $A$ calls `SignUp`. Since there is no player 1 in `free_game`, the RPSserver does not reply to $A$, therefore blocking it. $A$ is then set to be player 1. Later on when $B$ calls `SignUp` as well, since there is a player 1 the server replies to both tasks, allowing for them to go back into the ready queue.

Similar story for playing (`REQUEST_PLAY`). The server will block a task before the other task makes a move as well. Once both tasks/players have made their moves, the server evaluates the moves and determines a winner. The corresponding response types are then used as an easy way for tasks to determine if they had won, lost, or tied. There is a fourth response type, `RESPONSE_GAME_ENDED`, which is used when a player quits a game.

There are different scenarios for quitting.

1. $A$ performs `Quit` before $B$ has made a move. In this situation we can just remove $A$ from the game. Later on when $B$ makes a move it notices that $A$ is no longer in the game and thus it quits as well. The game is then recycled.
2. $A$ performs `Quit` after $B$ has made a move. $B$ is waiting for the server to reply in this situation, so we just reply to $B$ with the response that $A$ has quit.


The user task `task_k2rpsinit` creates the nameserver, the RPSserver, as well as two players. Be sure to add it to the scheduler in `main.c` if you wish to test out RPS. One bot is set to quit after 50 moves.


### (NEW) RPS Program Output Explained

Upon executing the user task, both bots call `SignUp`. The first game, which is game 0, is replied to both players.

The following is the output result of `task_k2rpsbot1` and `task_k2rpsbot2` playing each other until `task_k2rpsbot2` quits (After 50 matches).

```
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 0] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 0] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 0] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 1] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 0] tied
[Bot 2 Match 1] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 1] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 2] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 1] tied
[Bot 2 Match 2] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 2] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 3] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 2] tied
[Bot 2 Match 3] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 3] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 4] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 3] tied
[Bot 2 Match 4] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 4] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 5] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 4] tied
[Bot 2 Match 5] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 5] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 6] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 5] tied
[Bot 2 Match 6] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 6] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 7] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 6] tied
[Bot 2 Match 7] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 7] won
[Bot 2 Match 8] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 7] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 8] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 8] won
[Bot 2 Match 9] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 8] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 9] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 9] won
[Bot 2 Match 10] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 9] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 10] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 10] won
[Bot 2 Match 11] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 10] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 11] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 11] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 12] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 11] lost
[Bot 2 Match 12] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 12] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 13] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 12] lost
[Bot 2 Match 13] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 13] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 14] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 13] lost
[Bot 2 Match 14] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 14] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 15] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 14] tied
[Bot 2 Match 15] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 15] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 16] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 15] tied
[Bot 2 Match 16] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 16] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 17] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 16] tied
[Bot 2 Match 17] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 17] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 18] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 17] tied
[Bot 2 Match 18] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 18] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 19] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 18] tied
[Bot 2 Match 19] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 19] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 20] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 19] tied
[Bot 2 Match 20] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 20] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 21] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 20] tied
[Bot 2 Match 21] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 21] won
[Bot 2 Match 22] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 21] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 22] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 22] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 23] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 22] lost
[Bot 2 Match 23] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 23] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 24] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 23] lost
[Bot 2 Match 24] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 24] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 25] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 24] lost
[Bot 2 Match 25] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 25] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 26] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 25] lost
[Bot 2 Match 26] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 26] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 27] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 26] lost
[Bot 2 Match 27] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 27] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 28] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 27] lost
[Bot 2 Match 28] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 28] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 29] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 28] tied
[Bot 2 Match 29] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 29] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 30] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 29] tied
[Bot 2 Match 30] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 30] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 31] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 30] tied
[Bot 2 Match 31] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 31] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 32] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 31] tied
[Bot 2 Match 32] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 32] tied
```
We can see that up until this point since both players are giving the same moves, they tie every match
```
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 33] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 32] tied
[Bot 2 Match 33] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 33] won
[Bot 2 Match 34] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 33] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 34] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 34] won
[Bot 2 Match 35] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 34] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 35] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 35] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 36] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 35] lost
[Bot 2 Match 36] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 36] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 37] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 36] lost
[Bot 2 Match 37] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 37] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 38] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 37] lost
[Bot 2 Match 38] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 38] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 39] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 38] lost
[Bot 2 Match 39] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 39] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 40] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 39] lost
[Bot 2 Match 40] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 40] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 41] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 40] lost
[Bot 2 Match 41] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 41] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 42] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 41] lost
[Bot 2 Match 42] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 42] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 43] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 42] tied
[Bot 2 Match 43] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 43] tied
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 44] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 43] tied
[Bot 2 Match 44] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 44] won
[Bot 2 Match 45] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 44] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 45] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 45] won
[Bot 2 Match 46] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 45] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 46] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 46] won
[Bot 2 Match 47] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 46] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 47] Chose scissor
[Bot 2 Match 47] won
[Bot 2 Match 48] Chose paper
[Bot 1 Match 47] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 48] Chose rock
[Bot 2 Match 48] won
[Bot 2 Match 49] Chose scissor
[Bot 1 Match 48] lost
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 49] Chose rock
[Bot 1 Match 49] won
Press any key to continue
[Bot 1 Match 50] Chose paper
[Bot 2 Match 49] lost
```
Up until this point we see that the bots alternate between winning and losing, which is justified as in match 46 bot1 chose paper and bot2 chose scissor. Therefore bot2 won match 46 and bot1 lost match 46.
```
[Bot 1 Match 50] The other player has left the game, press any key to quit
[Bot 2] Quit the game
```
Now we see that bot2 has completed its for loop of 50 iterations. It quits. Bot1 had already given its move, but when bot2 quits the rpsserver replies to bot1 that bot2 had quit

### (NEW) Performance

Time is measured using Timer3 with the 508 kHz clock. This means that each tick is roughly 2 microseconds. To reduce startup and timer costs and to increase the precision of the measurement, we run each scenario 100 times and compute the average time spent on a single run. To future enhance the accuracy, we try to determine the fixed overhead of the measurement by seeing how long it takes for a loop to execute a 100 `nop`s. The measured time will include the cost of the loop itself and one timer interval. We take the average of 100 such `nop` loop measurements and subtract this cost from the SRR timing measurement before taking the mean for the SRR measurement. While the overhead cost is significant for transferring 4 bytes, it is insignificant for larger sizes.

Looking at the performance measurements, we see that performance for Send first and Receive first are basically the same. When optimization is disabled, we see that message size is a significant factor as the 256 byte message takes almost 5x the time of the 4 byte message. However, if optimization is enabled, it's only 50% more. This suggests that optimization creates a more efficient memcpy, probably through vectorization.

We have that enabling the caches will create a speedup in general. However, looking at the cost for transferring 4 bytes, we see that SRR overhead is significant and will count for at least half the time of transferring 64 bytes even through we transfer 16x more data. It is suspected that the context switch is expensive, especially in regards to saving context and rescheduling.

### Asserts

Defined in `my_assert.h`, when an assertion fails, a sad train ascii art is printed onto the screen. Additionally,
developers can add context about the failed assertion as part of the second parameter of `KASSERT`


### Tasks

A TCB struct serves two purposes: 1. It is a free slab of memory that points to the next free slab of memory. 2. It contains information of a task.

There is a pointer to the next free slab of memory that can used to hold a new task. All the task memory slabs reside in a TCB array. This implements intrusive linkage and avoids the use of `free` and `malloc`, as all the memory that tasks will ever need is allocated on the stack as the `TCB[]` array.

Tasks contain the stack (an array of 32 bit integers), and its register struct. When the task is running, its register struct can also be accessed globally (and in assembly) as a global variable points to it.

Since the word size of ARM is 4 bytes, the stack is an array of `uint32_t`.

The stack size was chosen to be $2048 \cdot wordsize$. This allows for, theoretically, $\frac{32 \cdot 10^{6}}{2048 \cdot 4} \approx 3906$ tasks. In reality that is definitely not the case because available memory would have been used to store other data structures as well. Thus, each task has a stack size of $2048 \cdot wordsize = 8192$ bytes. 

For K1, the maximum number of tasks allowed (`MAX_NUM_TASKS`) was chosen to be 10. This is because only a small fixed number of tasks are executed in this version of the kernel. This number will be increased for K2.

[K2 UPDATE] The `MAX_NUM_TASKS` is now set to be 1000 to facilitate for multiple RPS games.

### Scheduling

The scheduler uses a fixed size array based heap that stores the pointers of the TCB's. The actual contents of the TCB's are stored in the TCB array declared on the stack of the kernel's main function.

The heap is a max heap and thus allows for tasks with the highest priorities to be popped in $O(\log(n))$ time. For tasks that have equivalent priorities, the timestamp of when they were added to the queue is used as a tie breaker. This also ensures that the heap behaves like a FIFO queue when all the tasks have the same priorities.


### Context Switching

The kernel register is a global struct, similarly the pointer to the register struct of the current task is also a global variable. This allowed for us
to reference the register structs directly in assembly. Registers can be accessed and modified without needing to directly modify the task stack.

`switch_user` is used to store kernel registers and load the registers of the next task

`return_swi` is used to store the registers of the currently running task and load the kernel registers. It is the swi handler so it's memory address is stored at `0x28`, where the hardware uses as the swi vector.

The context switching implementation can be better explained by following through with a walkthrough of a sample program flow:

Upon creating and adding the first task, the kernel goes into a continuous loop. It first takes the task at the head of the ready queue and selects for it to be executed. The task register pointer `user_reg` is updated to point to the register struct of the chosen task. `switch_user` is then called which saves the kernel registers. In particular, the return address of `switch_user` is stored as the PC register in the register struct, so that when kernel state is restored the execution will resume past `switch_user`. The user task's registers are then loaded, and thus the user task continues execution.

When the user task performs a syscall, for example `Create(...)`, the arguments are placed on to `r0`. Then a software interrupt is triggered. PC is then set to `return_swi` by the hardware. User task registers are stored and the kernel state is reloaded. As mentioned earlier, since the PC of the kernel was saved to be the return register of `switch_user`, the kernel continues execution at the instruction right after `switch_user`. `switch_user` and `return_swi` combine to create the appearance that running the user task is as simple as calling a function. From the kernel's point of view, it has simply called a function and the function has returned what to do next. This luxury of simplicity enjoyed by the kernel is the materialization of the blood, sweat, and tears of assembly developers (me). 

The arguments are then retrieved from the user task's `r0`. The type of the syscall is retrieved by retrieving the parameter of the `swi [...]` instruction that was executed by the user task. Since that instruction was the last instruction to be executed by the user task before the software interrupt, we were able to retrieve it by just decrementing the PC of the user task by 4. Once the system call has been serviced, the return result is stored in user task's `r0`. The user task is then placed back into the ready queue to be executed in the future. When the user task is selected in the future to continue execution, and once its registers and PC are restored, it would continue execution from the point after the `swi` instruction. The return result is stored in `r0`, which is retrieved and returned as a C function return. From the user task's point of view, it has simply called a function and the function has returned a value. This luxury of simplicity enjoyed by the user task is the materialization of the blood, sweat, and tears of kernel developers (also me). 

### Context Switching Program Output Explained

```
Created: 1
Created: 2
Me: 3 Parent: 0
Me: 3 Parent: 0
Created: 3
Me: 4 Parent: 0
Me: 4 Parent: 0
Created: 4
FirstUserTask: exiting
Me: 1 Parent: 0
Me: 2 Parent: 0
Me: 1 Parent: 0
Me: 2 Parent: 0
```

The first task created is `task_k1init`. Tasks 1 and 2 created by `task_k1init` have lower priority than `task_k1init`. Therefore `task_k1init` is able to print `Created: 1` and `Created: 2` without interruptions. However once `task_k1init` creates task 3, which has higher priority than `task_k1init`, task 3 takes over the CPU. Even after making syscalls or yielding, task 3 is still brought back to the front of the ready queue because it has the highest priority. Therefore it is able to complete execution and print `Me: 3 Parent: 0`, `Me: 3 Parent: 0`. Once task 3 finishes execution `task_k1init` once again has the highest priority. It is able to continue execution and print `Created: 3`. Once `task_k1init` creates task 4 which has a higher priority, the same thing that happened with task 3 happens again. Task 4 is able to complete execution and print `Me: 4 Parent: 0`, `Me: 4 Parent: 0`. Once task 4 is completed, it is no longer in the ready queue and `task_k1init` can continue and print `Created: 4` and `FirstUserTask: exiting`. At this point `task_k1init` has finished execution and therefore only tasks 1 and 2 are in the ready queue. Tasks 1 and 2 alternate execution as they have the same priority and are moved to the back of the ready queue during syscalls and yields. The ready queue behaves like a FIFO queue in this case since both tasks have the same priorities. This is why we see:
```
Me: 1 Parent: 0
Me: 2 Parent: 0
Me: 1 Parent: 0
Me: 2 Parent: 0
```

Finally, both tasks complete and the kernel has no more tasks in the ready queue. The while loop terminates and the kernel exits.

### Creating your own user tasks

Since user task's have their lr's initialized to call Exit(), there is no need for users to explicitly include `Exit()` in their user tasks.
